---
title: A Rubyist's Perspective on Testing in Swift
---

* Xcode's built-in UI testing had significant reliability issues when I tested it: a "hello world" test I recorded would immediately fail upon replaying it. Manually editing it didn't help. The [KIF framework](https://github.com/kif-framework/KIF) has been a lot more reliable for me. It also provides access to the real view instances, so I can do things like check the number of rows in a table.
* KIF doesn't reset the app after each test, so you will want to have the `setUp()` method go back to the main screen of your app for consistency.
* Direct model access (e.g. instantiating models in tests to set up test data) works well with KIF, with a few notes. You will want to reset the model store after each test to make sure they don't pollute each other's data. And you you may need to manually kick off a view to redload/redraw since you're changing its data in an atypical way.
* KIF's main examples are in Objective-C, but it works well with Swift too. Just follow the instructions in the readme and you shouldn't have any trouble.
* I tried writing my KIF UI tests with Quick, but the explicit `self` required in its closures was a big detriment to readability: I had to write `self.tester()` instead of 'tester()`, which was a big drag when the tester is referenced so many times. Saving the return value of `self.tester()` to a local variable wasn't a good workaround, because this broke line number reporting.
* But Nimble expectations worked great with KIF tests, even using normal Xcode test classes instead of Quick specs. I already find assertion-style less readable than expectation-style, and the fact that Xcode assertions have an `XCT` prefix makes the readability even worse.
* I did end up using Quick for unit tests. One difficulty I had with Quick is in getting it to compile with method calls that can throw exceptions. In XCTest cases there is no set test method signature, so I just declare them with `throws` when necessary. But the closures passed to `it` can't be declared to throw. And putting a do/catch construct around each hinders readability. Instead, I prefix the calls to the throwable methods with `try!` instead of `try`. This means that no do/catch construct is required; you'll just get a runtime error if one throws an exception.
* Another downside with Quick is that it doesn't show a preview of tests in the testing sidebar as reliably, because those methods are dynamically created. But it's not 100% reliable with XCTest either. And they aren't as necessary for me, because I found clicking individual tests to run them in isolation was unreliable. As an alternative, I had to disable suites/tests. I didn't find myself needing to disable individual cases/examples, because unit tests ran so quickly it wasn't needed, and because acceptance tests mostly had one example per test.
* In Ruby there's no such thing as interfaces or protocols: if you want a test double to substitute in for a real object, just create a different "duck type" object that responds to the same methods. But in Swift (like in many languages), protocols must be made explicit. So if you're planning on doing any unit testing, go ahead and put protocols around services, since you'll want create test doubles of them.
* Since automatically creating test doubles is hard in Swift because of the lack of reflection capabilities, I decided to start out hand-rolling my own test doubles, and that's worked fine so far. I added "Double" to the class names instead of "Mock" because I'm not rigidly following the official definition of a mock, or any other type of test double. Instead, I'm adding just enough features to each to satisfy the tests I need to write.
* I like naming my protocols the simplest name for the thing (i.e. WidgetStore) and the adding a qualifier to the concrete implementation (i.e. CoreDataWidgetStore).
* I wanted to create test doubles for my Core Data models so that unit tests wouldn't be dependent on a Core Data context to instantiate models. But unfortunately I couldn't name the protocol the simplest possible name ("Widget") because that was the name of the concrete Core Data model that's generated by the "Create NSManagedObject Subclass…" command. Instead, I named the protocol "WidgetModel", and that seemed clear enough.